Abstract
Most of the damages were experienced on the buildings which were conventionally built without any consideration of IS codal provisions conveniently called non-engineered structures. Non-engineered structures are frequently affected by vibrations due to various natural and artificial sources. Thus, it needs special attention. It is, therefore, necessary to check the performance of non-engineered structures through various health monitoring techniques. A piezoelectric-ceramic (PZT) sensor-based technique called electromechanical impedance (EMI), in which the sensors efficiently operate at a high-frequency range and can typically detect damage at the initial level which is implemented for the purpose. In this research work, experimental tests are performed on the non-engineered reinforced concrete frame using EMI technique by utilizing a PZT sensor which is bonded to the structure using the high-strength epoxy adhesive. The experiment is carried out to identify and locate the damages using frequency variations, and the severity was checked using extracted equivalent parameter; damage index. Second, a Python programming is developed by the authors to identify and quantify the damage index and root mean square deviation index in the frame. The frequency responses obtained from the experimental tests are used in the programming. The performance of the program is compared with the experimentally calculated parameters to check the efficiency of the programming. According to the results of the comparison, it is observed that python programming can be effectively used for damage detection.

Introduction
As India is a country with geographical diversity, there are many such structures prevailing in the country which notify the culture of the country. All such structures reveal diversity in the type of construction with respect to the designs, the material, the craftsmen ship and the culture of that particular area. There is a vast diversity in the construction practices in the history owing to the above-mentioned factors. In ancient days, the availability of design considerations or IS codal provision was not available [1, 2]. Hence, every geographical diversity depicts a new form of construction. Arya [3] stated that all those structures which were built before the introduction of IS codes shall be referred as non-engineered structures as no engineering features are considered. Moreover, the characteristics and the prototype of those structures show the culture rather than the engineering perspective. Such non-engineered structures are nowadays on the verge of destruction due to the reason of earthquake.

Boen [4] observed that maximum structural failures during past earthquakes were associated with deficiencies in the built structure, either caused due to lack of supervision, improper design or improper construction practices, such as poor materials and workmanship. According to Kusumastuti et al. [5], non-engineered structures can be divided into two main categories, i.e., non-engineered buildings which utilize locally available materials and following local tradition and culture. Such structures are generally called indigenous or vernacular buildings. These are designated as the first category. The urban-type masonry construction or a traditional look construction not adopting the traditional craftsmanship and material is the second category. The first category of construction is gradually fading and is currently being replaced by the second category of non-engineered buildings.

Park [6] in his work stated that existing reinforced concrete (RC) buildings designed prior to 1970s are vulnerable to shear failure in beam–column joints under earthquake loads because of insufficient transverse reinforcement in the joint region. Watanabe et al. [7] found that non-engineered construction varies in scale and technological level depending on the type of construction sector. Teguh [8] learned that when the concept of the traditional houses is adapted to modern structures, the building shapes and layouts are usually maintained, but the traditional materials are replaced with concrete and bricks. Building materials, such as brick, stone, mud, timber and galvanized iron, are widely used to build the non-engineered traditional houses. Reyes et al. [9] conducted cyclic tests on six rammed earth walls to quantify their shear capacity and based on the experimental results of his investigation, derived a formula to estimate shear capacity of earthen walls by considering the wall axial load ratio and aspect ratio. Kaur and Bhalla [10] investigated the capability of thin PZT patches with surface-bonded/embedded for the energy harvesting.

In the field of civil engineering, concrete structures are the most widely used form of construction. Hence, the security issue for these structures is a matter of concern because of significant shortcomings of the structure such as easy cracking. The bearing capacity of the member is reduced due to the appearance of cracks. The aim of health monitoring is to track and evaluate the performance, symptoms of operational incidents and defects caused by the deterioration or damage and also the health status of the structure during and after extreme events. The basic objective of structural health monitoring (SHM) is damage identification. Hui and Jinping [11] proposed damage detection approaches such as probabilistic damage identification approach based on dynamic sensitivity analysis and damage detection approach by using information fusion techniques and put forth the role of SHM in developing smart earth in the future.

Kaveh and Zolghadr [12] studied the optimization problem with the location and severity of the damages as its variables such that the natural frequencies of the finite element model correspond to the experimentally measured frequencies of the actual damaged structure. They modified the charged system search algorithm in order to check the efficiency of the proposed algorithm in damage detection inverse problems. Park et al. [13] carried out real-time damage detection on composite-reinforced concrete walls and analyzed it with experimental investigations carried out on a 1/4-scale bridge element to prove the effectiveness of impedance-based health monitoring technique to monitor the condition of various civil structures. Bhalla and Soh [14] stated that the EMI technique is suitable for diagnosing damages in structures ranging from miniature precision machine and aerospace components to large civil structures.

Yan et al. [15] stated that the submission of PZT patches for health monitoring is constructed on the principle of electro-structural coupling between the bonded patch and the local structural system in its vicinity. Li et al. [16] stated that the structure also affects the electrical circuit including the attached PZT patch and the AC source. Hu et al. [17] carried out the experiments on concrete slabs and analyzed using RMSD index and correlation coefficient deviation index. Karayannis et al. [18] studied that the EMI can be considered as a highly promising nondestructive health monitoring method and piezoelectric lead zirconate titanate transducers are very sensitive to the damage detection at an early stage. Kaveh and Maniat [19] applied magnetic charged system search (MCSS) and particle swarm optimization (PSO) to identify the location and extent of multi-damage in structures using a variety of numerical examples including two beams and two trusses. Kaveh and Vaez [20] formulated the objective function using the dynamic method and modal-based approach followed by testing different truss structures with multiple elements scenarios. Na and Baek [21] studied that one of the advantages of the EMI technique is that a single PZT transducer acts as both an actuator and sensor simultaneously. Nayak and Pawar [22] studied the frequency responses and dynamic properties of the steel frame using low-frequency patches PZT patches. Jagadale et al. [23] carried out damage detection on specimen like concrete cube of size 150 × 150 × 150 mm and aluminum plate of size 200 × 200 × 2 mm using piezoelectric-ceramic lead material and found it effective in detecting incipient-, moderate- and severe-level damages. Using various methods of artificial neural networks, Morfidisa and Kostinakis [24] studied the seismic damage state and optimized their predictions about the seismic damage state of the samples. Jagadale et al. [25] studied the efficiency of PZT by carrying out a case study on a bridge model, and they found out noticeable changes in frequencies for moderate and severe damages. Kaveh et al. [26] used a significant mutation in damage detection by considering natural frequencies and mode shapes and concluded that enhanced vibrating particles system (EVPS) obtained better results than the vibrating particles system (VPS). Kare et al. [27] studied earthquake response considering soil structure interaction of 3d frames with strap footing. Nayak et al. [28] studied earthquake and wind analysis of Diagrid structure structures considering different shapes.

Non-engineered and heritage structures being a matter of concern nowadays, this project needs to be carried out to assess the deterioration of the non-engineered building at an early stage so as to develop a standard and effective methodology to strengthen non-engineered structures. For strengthening of these structures, damage detection (location and severity) of the components or the structure as a whole needs to be done. This research proves to be unique as the sensor-based EMI techniques have not yet been reported on non-engineered type of structures recently. The results of frequency obtained from the experiment have been used in developing Python language, which is a versatile programming language. The development of Python can provide us with the time-saving method for assessment of health of the structure which may eventually lead to the development of automated technique for monitoring the health status of the structure. In this work, the compatibility of Python in calculating the parameters like damage index and RMSD index in order to study the severity and location of the damage has been checked. It can prove to be emerging software in civil engineering.